listen so the south by southwest film
festival went online this year following
2020's event which was one of the first
big cancellations before the whole world
was paused but
they found a way to press play and we
got the chance to catch over 70 movies
sure i still miss the tacos the weather
the scratch and sniffs and spirit
cleansings that they were holding at
screenings but
overall i'd say that it was still a
pretty solid lineup for 2021.
let me explain
[Music]
so starting off with the shorts at south
by it was cool to see a nice variety of
stories
the director of little grey bubbles
which is one of my favorite shorts from
a couple years back
came in with a new one called the moya
which follows a new dad searching for a
rabbi to
trim his son or have him trim his own
traditions there were really great
animated shorts like
navosande the musician and nuevorico
which follows two siblings who harvest
the power of reggaeton there were a
couple of great horrors with creepy
creatures with domestic undertones
and also haunted video game ones that i
really hope nintendo doesn't claim
because
well that one's still up on youtube
right now there were great dramas there
were great thrillers
comedies and of course they came in with
the docks beyond the model was very
timely one which also won the texas
award
there was one about the secret bathrooms
and the trade center but it was
hbo's the last cruise that comes in as
our number 10.
[Music]
now this one is pretty long for a short
clocking in at 40 minutes and
even though it is a dock i'd also say it
kind of serves as a thriller hannah
olson who also did hbo's baby god
follows the passengers and crew of this
cruise line that had one of the biggest
coveted outbreaks
she intercuts people on vacation those
working in the kitchen the docks
people who were scared and those who
felt they're just inconvenienced
it delivers on the anxiety of that trip
as you're watching and waiting as real
people are getting infected
and you know that it's only going to be
a matter of time before hollywood turns
this into a quarantine type blockbuster
where people are going to be getting
infected in the ship one by one before
the credits
directed by michael bay
[Music]
summer animals was inspired by the
families who are living in and out of
motels and how in texas the heat becomes
yet another thing you need to try to
escape
it follows three siblings on a hot
summer day as the eldest tries to find a
spot for them to cool off
and i say that this would make a great
double feature with i'm fine thanks for
asking which also played as part of the
feature narrative competition
it won the jury award for the texas
shore and it's playing on topic which
yes it's it's another streaming service
that people are subscribing to
cost money but and they have good stuff
[Music]
are you still there as a quiet 15-minute
story about a young girl who's stranded
in a strip mall parking lot after her
car battery dies
and while it is a pretty simple premise
it builds up as you learn more about
safa and her past her interactions with
the people around her
and i thought it was beautifully shot
and would highly recommend it
[Music]
sales per hour was a short that was uh
pretty jarring but
thanks to the power of virtual cinema i
was able to play it back and figure out
what was going on and
damn it's nasty it takes place at a
clothing shop where an employee realizes
something and has to decide whether
completing the sale is more important
than standing up to a customer
and it leaves you pretty livid so while
i can't recommend it to everyone it was
definitely effective at placing you in
the scenario of an employee
facing that moral dilemma to which there
is a clear answer to
[Music]
doretha's blues is directed by channing
godfrey peoples who did last year's miss
juneteenth and here she directs one of
the best performances out of all the
shorts in my opinion
it follows a blue singer who finds
herself at a bar venting their drinking
but it builds up to a finale that
absolutely hits
[Music]
our bed is green is an animated short
about this vr facility that data mines
whoever you want so that they can
virtually appear in front of you
and then i guess they like charge you by
the hour or something i know this was
the director's thesis which she also
animated and worked on the score for it
but
i i found it to be a very intriguing
animation not just with its style but
just learning about the character and
realizing why she's doing what she's
doing
[Music]
stuffed is a short musical about
taxidermy involving a human
in my top three there's soak that
revolves around a 16 year old who's
trying to get her mom to come back home
after she's left them
i think it's beautifully shy it's got a
very subtle script both performances
were fantastic
and at a 10k budget i'd love to see a
feature done by this team
[Music]
play it safe takes place in an acting
class where jonathan gets typecast for
appears play and then has to do an
acting exercise that
challenges everybody in the room it's
uncomfortable i've seen people say that
they don't like it
but in my opinion that's because the
filmmakers didn't play it safe
themselves
[Music]
putting the sunday in shorts that also
played here to the side the best one i
caught at south by
would have to be the box it's an
incredible hybrid short that follows
people who spend time in solitary
confinement
retelling their stories through
reenactments and stop motion that evokes
a disparity they went through
and it is compelling visually i don't
think any short on this list touches it
and there are testimonials that really
embody the severity of the situation and
what it's like to be subjected to the
box
one of the directors is even someone who
spent time in the box
and honestly whenever there's a short
that you're willing to see as a feature
you know it's a must watch
[Music]
now in terms of the docs south by was
stacked there were several music ones
that
follow tom petty and the making of his
album wildflowers under the volcano
showcase one of the most iconic studios
that's now
covered in ashes demi had a tea shop and
she was spilling
and charli xcx had a really cool dock
that was breaking down her quarantine
album and how collaborative it was with
her fans
even jumping on instagram to workshop
some lyrics the lost sons followed a
dude investigating his kidnapping as an
adult
while oxi kingpin shined an obvious
light on who's running the opioid
epidemic there were docks on the field
labor being kept up by the kids of those
workers
luchadoras from juarez who put it all on
the line but coming in at my top 10
we actually have a tie
[Music]
introducing selma blair which won the
special jury recognition for
exceptional intimacy and storytelling
rightfully deserves it the doc follows
blair who reflects on her history as a
prolific supporting actress as she also
gives an inside look at her life with ms
and so i did have to tell him after the
mri said i have something called
multiple sclerosis
and he almost cried and said will it
kill you and i said
no i mean we never know what kills us
arthur
but this is not the doctor telling me
i'm dying
and he was like oh okay and that was it
an interview she talked about the
difficulty of being diagnosed because
doctors kept telling her that
that wasn't the case it was just her
being pregnant and at a certain point
she even reached out to michael j
fox before even knowing him because at
least she knew that he was vocal about
his condition
and so she gives director rachel fleet
raw unfiltered access into her life so
that people can
see what it's like on a daily basis and
while some dogs may feel like they're
editing out you know certain things to
capture the subject and the best lens
this one is purely honest through and
through with some shots even being
caught in an iphone whenever they didn't
allow the bigger cameras in certain
places
there's an aspect that contrasts the
relationship between selma and her mom
and then that of her and her kid
that i feel could have made for an
entire feature itself you see the ups
and downs of seeking treatment even as a
celebrity
and her overall commentary and approach
which is super blunt
and funny in the darkest way possible
like things people don't know if i yell
i can push enough hair so i don't have
it
so sometimes when someone's looking for
something i'm like is that left no like
[ __ ] and i'm like it's just
my way tell you clearly a very emotional
doc
but worth it and one that's going to be
premiering on discovery plus
[Music]
through the plexiglas is my other number
10 which follows liz lambert who bought
the san jose motel in austin
decades ago in order to repair it and it
documents all the different characters
who she hosts there you know
a lot of the intimate moments with her
tenants all of which he caught on camera
back in the day
i never expected to be engaged in the
lives there
and thank god i was just one night
as director producer and the one who
shot it all you get to see the
relationships that she forms with these
people who are just stopping by
or you know they're waiting for their
mtv contract to go through people who
are just living there extensively at the
motel
and all of these very interesting
backstories that end up clashing
together
it is a very sour ending in my opinion
but i think it's a great documentation
of the people who occupied south
congress
and the vast changes that happened
through real estate
[Music]
lily topples the world is about lily
havish and her domino empire that she's
created on youtube
it's an interesting look at taking a
hobby and being able to create a career
out of it
with all the obstacles that come in
maintaining a massive channel while also
being in the middle of school
and all the business moves that she's
working with at such a young age with
points even in the movie where i was
yelling lily don't take that deal
topple it it's a fun little doc that
could have shown a little bit more of
her domino struggles and
especially the creating of but it
explores the new generation of contents
and how a lot of old heads
still haven't caught on to it
[Music]
the hunt for planet b revolves around
the web space telescope that's 100 times
more powerful than the hubble as it
searches for life and space in order to
make contact
i wanted to make a science film that
didn't feel like a science film i
personally loved how while it does
follow scientists
it's subtly capturing humanity like
you're hearing what inspires each of
them to join the project
how they move in the world their daily
commutes
the struggles it's showcasing to us how
even if we were to escape and find
planet b
it wouldn't really alter how we've taken
care of planet a there are some great
talking heads in the movie as well like
jill tarter who's the astronomer who
inspired
the movie contact and she has a
fantastic line about
switching one's perspective from being
less about what we
believe and more about what we can
explore the idea of working as a
collective to achieve things beyond us
we've hardly begun to look in 50 plus
years
we've observed only about one
hot tubs worth of the ocean
maybe it's not so surprising that we
haven't detected anything yet that said
if we ever do make contact man are we
screwed
[Music]
we are as gods as a documentary that i
actually had the chance to catch as a
part of last year's cancelled south by
but they brought it back to screen in
and it still delivers it documents
stuart brand's career and influence and
how he pushed the government to show the
first picture of the entire earth how he
wrote the whole earth catalog that
inspired the likes of steve jobs and
while they take the time to debate his
environmental views which i thought was
a good thing
the concept of reviving species which he
was really big for
it does practically settle on the fact
that yeah this man is never going to see
the results of his life work
in his lifetime and still he has a very
overly optimistic look on technology
especially when dealing with genetics
which is where the title comes from we
are as gods
so we might as well get good at it so if
this interests you
then i recommend doing a double feature
with this and human nature
[Music]
clark is all about kevin smith and if
you're a fan it may just feel like a
recap
but it is a pretty complete one with
self critiques and all from him selling
his comic collection
maxing out credit cards and putting it
all on the line to become a sundance
darling
to his personal journey right after his
heart attack it's a nice inside look at
smith as a creator
collaborator and a person who realizes
that his success doesn't come from the
gatekeepers who saw him as the
indie flavor of the week but the fans
who related to his voice and chose to
listen
[Music]
not going quietly follows 80 barkin an
activist who in his early 30s was
diagnosed with als which only pushed him
to fight for more health care reform in
america
like so many of you i have experienced
the ways our health care system is
fundamentally broken
enormous costs denied claims
dehumanizing treatment when we are most
in need
from his personal journey on becoming a
father and the physicality of that to
visiting politicians who just straight
up shut doors in his face
i believe that this is a pivotal dock
but one that guts you
emotionally
[Music]
dear mr brody looks back at the
millionaire heir of the margin fortune
who decided to give out money to
anybody who wrote to him it follows all
the media attention he got but also
dives deep
into those letters many of which you
know decades later have been unopened
and they start reading them to you even
going as far as trying to relocate the
people
who sent them out it's a televised
selection so you know it's got that
stamp of approval and it's even one of
those docs that does something i usually
don't like
but i'm gonna be honest on a re-watch it
may not work for everybody
but it did kind of work for me i'd
recommend going in knowing as little as
possible for this doc and i would also
recommend the director's previous
animated documentary
tower
[Music]
woodlands darkened days is the ultimate
horror history
introspective and it tops three hours so
if you're working on a full core video
essay
yeah it's up it's the directorial debut
of kirila janiece who's also a film
programmer and horror historian
who traces the influences effects and
tropes that have defined
not just a genre but people's psyche in
certain places
it tackles a lot of ideas that have
become synonymous with the genre
where they come from how they get passed
on and even questions the term you know
folklore i love the way that they ended
up making it really worldwide and how
things are all interconnected
and i was surprised to see them get to
la llorona to candyman
like they get so much in there i
definitely consider this
a must watch
[Music]
who we are is a lecture doc since it
takes jeffrey robinson's talk that he's
toured with
but it is a masterpiece of a lecture doc
as aclu's legal director
he's gone throughout the country and
examined the intricacies of racism from
the shackles on display at a museum
where
they were meant for kids so the dude
holding a confederate flag outside
not really knowing why it excels at
chronicling the state-sanctioned
oppression and how slavery in the u.s
isn't just black history but america's
history and
if you were one of the people who saw
them which also premiered at south by
i would recommend watching this doc
instead it's also playing at seattle
it's a part of the hot docs film fest
and i think it's a must-watch
[Music]
topping my list for the docs is when
claude got shot which follows three
strangers who become connected after a
weekend of gun violence
claude who shot by a teen and that teen
who shot by a nurse who he later tried
to rob
it's a raw look at the situation that
keeps its viewpoints gray
not really picking sides and even
subverting any expectations you may have
as you learn more about their
backstories
it's directed by claude's friend which
makes the access to their story even
more personal
it's even produced by snoop dogg in his
snoopadelic pictures
and it's one of the best documentaries
of the year that i've seen in my opinion
so far
[Music]
when it comes to narrative features
there was a whole coveted sub-genre that
had sisters going on a road trip to
rescue their grandma from a nursing home
another about quarantining at home with
the person you just broke up with and of
course mark duplass learning spanish
through skype
and then calling in a movie called
language lessons
trapped is a tense thriller about seven
women during a revolution in egypt
broadcast signal intrusion follows video
pirates in 1990 chicago
best summer ever it's the most diverse
and inclusive version of camp rock
while swansong stars urokire in a love
letter to a shifting gay culture
and then of course there was the meta
movie about making a movie inside of a
movie
pretending to be an experiment on
romance directed written and edited
and starring hanolina as hanalina the
whole cast of the film has been
part of creating the script that you
will
watch as a film yeah including all the
sexual fantasies and nipple piercing
scenes
you will see enjoy enjoy
we orgasm together like
[Music]
starting off my top 10 narratives though
is the fantasy horror that follows a
park ranger scoping out a lost drone
only to get lost herself if you're a fan
of annihilation or in the earth i rank
this right underneath those as it sees
nature not just as a setting but also
the villain to a degree
the people living in the forest also
have their own religion in accordance to
what's going on there
which includes visits by these clicker
looking beings that attack at night
luckily by naughty dog's own logic i
don't think they should be suing
but damn are they similar i noticed a
couple of biblical homages within the
duo in the forest
as well as how the movie subtly plays
with the aspect ratios depending on what
character you're following
so if this speaks your interest i know
neon picked it up along with the cow
and it should be getting a summer
release and i can't wait to make a full
lme because while i did enjoy it
man i've got one great with that ending
[Music]
the drover's wife is an australian
western written directed and starring
leah purcell who also acted in the play
adaptation of the short story
she used a grandpa's diary to inform the
film in its setting which
digs at the violent history of the land
as we see a single mother struggling to
survive with her kids and their family
farm
and i personally am a sucker for
westerns and i loved how even though
they didn't have the biggest of budgets
they still snuck in some beautiful
sweeping shots i know it may not peak
everyone's interest
and it made me notice a trope i've been
seeing in a lot of australian cinema
it's also apparent in nightingale but i
found it to be a decent western and i'm
looking forward to the upcoming
anthology feature that leia is also
working on
[Music]
islands follows a middle-aged filipino
dude who's never left home but he starts
feeling the pressure to find a partner
as his parents health starts to climb
and it does a great job of showing the
differences between cultures
especially in terms of the approach to
parental care just the family dynamics
in general and all those little
intricacies that you see
within the setup of the house it's a
very intimate story that's grounded by
its great direction
and especially the casting that never
shames its characters there's also a
part of the story that touches on
masturbation and the director
netherland talked about the differences
in film and how when it's on screen for
women it's always hyper sexualized
but for men it's always something that's
like creepy or embarrassing
and again that's just a part of the
movie it's not the whole thing but it
showcases how delicately he treats all
the material
and it's handled with such care to the
point that it even earns rogelio the
acting award at south by southwest and
rightfully so
and i give it a solid junior price
[Music]
bantu mama follows emma who gets
arrested in the dominican republic
before finding an escape that leaves her
to be sheltered by three miners
who just so happened to not have a
parent director ivana co-wrote it with
clarice the main actress and they use
their afro-caribbean and afro-european
roots to flesh out these characters
because not only does she become a
maternal figure for them but they also
start relating in terms of their culture
you know they realize certain traditions
and words and foods
overlap more that they think between
their hometowns and they start to
converse differently
there's another feature that played at
the fest called ludi that does the same
thing it does an excellent job at
showing the nuances and speech
especially as you encounter different
people throughout your day and the
different connections you make through
that
it has some very impressive natural
lighting that it uses for cinematography
but they also use non-professional
actors to play the kids
that was a big big thing for me i
thought it was a pretty solid drama that
i'd give a junior price to
and this was a much better movie than
the other afro-latino flick called
executive order and where brazil passes
a law
to send away highly melanin brazilians
back to africa
what the what
[Music]
in between girl is a teen dramedy and
the directorial debut from maimakino
which follows angie an artist in high
school who's also in the midst of her
parents divorce and all the changes that
come with that
and then on top of that she starts
things with this jake from hannah
montana looking fool
who may or may not be using her feel
like you're mocking me
i'm not mocking you
[Music]
it leans into the awkwardness you know
the cringe of youth decisions
and because she's also mixed there's all
these stereotypes that come with it
and the disconnect that she has with her
mother because she's white it's a very
independent movie
shot in 15 days but it's an awkward and
heartfelt junior price in my opinion
[Music]
here before stars the legend andrea
roosevelt who
never misses and she plays a missus
living in northern ireland while
mourning the loss of her daughter
until a new family moves in next door
and she starts to see a resemblance in
the kid
it's a slow burn but one that explores
grief as a different interpretation from
person to person
not something you could judge andrea's
acting has always been in the eyes and
her pupils get the spotlight in this one
the little girl who played megan was
also great
and it was interesting to hear that the
director stacy greg wrote andrea a fan
letter to be in the film i was like hey
i think you're amazing you know i've got
this script and of course you know i
didn't you know i really didn't think
that it would go the mind but
stranger things have happened and you
know she was uh
i think she was on the shoot at the time
and she said well look you know i'll
read it
and then she got back so quickly
[Music]
the spine of night is a fantasy epic
about this magical plan falling into the
wrong hands and the band of heroes that
must set out to rescue mankind
and i personally had a blast with it one
of the directors has a channel where
he's hosting a couple of their shorts so
if those pick your interest then
definitely put this one on your radar
they even talked about in a q a
how there's a version of the film that's
completely shot in live action before
they went on to animate it
i would love to see the behind the
scenes to that it's violent it's
unrelenting and i thought it had some
really dope characters with a solid
voice cast to go along with it
[Music]
violet follows a film executive named
violet who's continuously belittled by
the voice
inside her own head that just so happens
to be voiced by justin thoreau
it comes from justine bateman whose
brother has won some directing awards
and she herself now has one hell of a
debut
it does a lot on screen visually and it
may come off too overwhelming or maybe
even repetitive for some but
i think it nailed that feeling of
self-doubt that drowns the main
character's thoughts and causes her to
second guess
absolutely everything and it's also
juxtaposed alongside this text that
appears on screen
trying to be the positive reinforcement
that's always getting shot out by the
voice
and it was interesting to see that that
text actually comes from justine's own
handwriting
i feel this one's going to hit home for
a lot of people i think it's pretty good
and i would give it a combo price
[Music]
the fallout stars jenna ortega and
maddie ziegler as high schoolers coping
with the fallout of a school
tragedy as they're coming up on the most
pivotal years of their lives it's
directed by megan park who many may know
from the secret life of the american
teenager
and thus shaylee woodley also appears as
a therapist in the movie it's got
phineas composing his first film score
for this and
while it's not a perfect movie i think
it does an effective job
of handling the team's perspective to
the scenario and how each generation is
affected by it
it won the grand jury prize for
narrative feature and considering its
cast and topic
there's no doubt this one's going to
have a big release
[Music]
finally my favorite narrative out of the
fest is the norwegian drama slash comedy
ninja baby which follows a 23 year old
named raquel who finds out that she's
pregnant
along with like three other big
bombshells they collaborated with a
graphic novelist who sort of inspired
the story
to animate the ninja baby that actually
comes to life and
raquel interacts with i just thought it
was fantastic it's a movie that
challenges archetypes by switching up
the character roles that we usually see
in these movies and reminding you that
people don't have to be
pigeonholed to complete certain things
before they reach a certain age
i thought i had some hysterical moments
it had a fantastic ending and it's one
that i give a high combo price to
thank you guys for checking out this
video i'm catching all your thoughts
down below in the comment section
uh we do have an entire intercut that we
did with amanda the jedi a whole podcast
breaking down
every single movie that we saw at the
fest if you're curious to go check that
out we also have another streams that
you know we went through the entire
letterbox ranking list that we like to
do for the festivals
and trying to rank them in order
obviously it always switches it always
depends on the mode that you're in but
these are some picks that i just wanted
to put on y'all's radar to see if you
guys
enjoy it maybe it's something that
interests you there is one thing i will
say about south by
and how everything's shifted right now
especially with everything being online
but i know that south by is always a
fest that does things
based not on individual tickets but on a
whole like
you got to get like an entire pass so
350 to see one movie if you were only
interested in one
may have been a lot and that's why i
think there was a lot of like docs the
demi or the charlie xcx stocks that
could have sold out but they didn't
cause
i mean at that point you have to buy a
whole pass it's 350 bucks just to see a
movie
uh people wouldn't even pay that for a
concert so i'm curious to see if they
evolve that if they continue
doing the online experience i'm really
big on the fact that these festivals
should continue doing that but
we'll see how it evolves as you know
things start to open up and people are
able to go back
and see these movies in actual theaters
but i thought it was a pretty good fest
had some pretty good lineups
uh and i'm curious to see which ones
stand out to you and which ones i should
have on my radar until next time don't
forget to comment like and subscribe
and hopefully i'll see you in austin
next year